Add a tutorial for collaborative features (#530)
geojupyter/jupytergis: docs/user_guide/tutorials/02-collaboration/index.md

# Collaborative Features in JupyterGIS

Welcome to the JupyterGIS collaborative features tutorial. JupyterGIS enables seamless sharing of notebooks and GIS files, allowing teams—including GIS specialists, data analysts, and other experts—to work together on spatial projects in a shared environment. This guide will provide you with the tools and steps needed to collaborate effectively, using features like real-time editing, cursor tracking, follow mode, and annotations.

## Motivation

> Collaboration is at the heart of effective GIS projects. Teams often include members with diverse backgrounds, skills, and areas of expertise. Without robust collaborative tools, it can become challenging to share insights, make real-time decisions, and maintain consistency across project workflows. JupyterGIS simplifies collaboration by providing real-time editing, annotations, and interactive features that allow teams to seamlessly integrate their work.

Reviewer: >Collaboration is at the heart of effective GIS projects

:100:

:::{admonition} Objectives
:class: seealso
By following this tutorial, you will be able to:

- Generate shareable links to invite collaborators.
- Work together on GIS files and notebooks with live updates.
- Use follow mode to monitor collaborator activities.
- Add annotations and comments to provide context, ask questions, or share insights.

>   :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::
```

:::{admonition} Prerequisites
:class: warning

> Before beginning this tutorial, JupyterGIS must be installed on your computer (see [Installation instructions](https://jupytergis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/install.html)) or you can use an online version of JupyterGIS. Currently, real-time collaboration is not supported in [JupyterLite](https://jupytergis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lite/lab/index.html?path=france_hiking.jGIS/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before beginning this tutorial, JupyterGIS must be installed on your computer (see [Installation instructions](https://jupytergis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/install.html)). Alternatively, you can use an online installation of JupyterGIS, for example on a [JupyterHub](https://jupyter.org/hub). Note that currently, real-time collaboration is not supported in [JupyterLite](https://jupytergis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lite/lab/index.html?path=france_hiking.jGIS/).
```

:::

---

## 1. Sharing Your Document

### 1.1. Create Your GIS File

> - If you are using a local installation, run JupyterLab.
> 
> ```
> jupyter lab
> ```
> 
> - If you are using an online version, navigate to the JupyterGIS platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Open JupyterLab
    - If you are using a local installation, start JupyterLab.

      ```
      jupyter lab
      ```

    - If you are using an online version, navigate to the JupyterGIS platform.
```

- In the JupyterLab Launcher, scroll down to the **Other** section.
- Click **GIS File** to open a blank canvas for your project.

> ![New GIS File](images/new_gis_file.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ![New GIS File](images/new_gis_file.png)
```

The indentation tells the documentation generator to treat the image as if it's part of a bullet. As it is now, the images break up the bulleted list.

- Notice that you are given an anonymous username, which you can see in the upper right corner. Every user in the project will be assigned an anonymous username.

> ![Username](images/username.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ![Username](images/username.png)
```

### 1.2. Generate a Shareable Link

- Click on the **Share** button in your interface on the upper right corner, then click on the **Copy Link** button.
- Share this link with colleagues to invite them to your session.

> - If you are using a local installation, you can open a new browser and paste the link to simulate a different user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::{admonition} A note about local installations
:class: warning

If you are using a local installation, your JupyterLab instance is not open to the Internet by default and collaborators will not be able to join your session.

In this case, we recommend [using VSCode's LiveShare functionality to share a local server](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/liveshare/use/share-server-visual-studio-code#share-a-server) with a collaborator.

You can also open a new browser window and paste the share link to simulate a different user.
:::
```

![Share](images/share.png)

### 1.3. Confirm Collaborator Access

- When your colleagues join using the link, their usernames appear in the top right corner.

> - This lets you know exactly who is working on the document.

Reviewer: I think these sentences would be better as paragraph text. I think we might benefit from spending some time thinking about consistent tutorial style. This tutorial uses a lot of bullets, and the intro tutorial uses a combination of numbered lists and paragraphs.

If we decide on a consistent style, let's also document that style in the collaborator docs!

Author: Thank you for the detailed review Matt! I tried to match the tone of the first tutorial, using paragraphs and numbered lists instead of bulleted lists. I added a new document, Tutorial Writing Guide. Let me know if we need a more detailed guide.

![Shared Users](images/shared_users.png)

---

## 2. Real-Time Collaboration on a GIS File

### 2.1. Adding and Editing Layers

- Open the layer panel and add a new layer to your GIS file.
- The new layer appears immediately for all collaborators in your session.

> - Experiment by adjusting settings like opacity or color, each change is instantly visible to your collaborators.

Reviewer: Perhaps from this bullet we could link to the intro tutorial which explains how to change symbology.

![Add Layers](images/add_layers.gif)

### 2.2. Tracking Collaborators with Cursors

- Each user's cursor appears on the document in the same color as their icon. This feature makes it easy to see where your teammates are focused on.
- Click on a cursor to display the location (latitude and longitude) where that user is working.

![Cursor](images/cursor.png)

---

## 3. Using Follow Mode

Follow mode allows you to track another user’s activity in the document in real time. When enabled, you’ll see their actions as they navigate and edit. This feature is ideal for live demonstrations, interactive sessions, and collaborative meetings, as it lets you quickly align your view with a teammate’s actions and provide immediate feedback.

### 3.1. Activating Follow Mode

- Click on a collaborator's user icon in the upper right corner to activate follow mode. Observe that the document will then have a frame in their assigned color.
- Click on the user icon again to exit follow mode.

![Follow Mode](images/follow_mode.gif)

> ````{exercise}

Author: I can set the titles to `Exercise` without any numbers, or `Exercise (1)` with parentheses around the number. Which one is better?

> ````{exercise}

Reviewer: Great find! I don't have a strong preference, whichever one feels better to you. I don't think having a number is critical, but it might be useful in rare cases.

![Notebook](images/notebook.gif)

```{exercise}
:label: notebook-collaboration

- Create a new notebook and load your GIS document.
- Ask your colleague to open the notebook, write the code to remove the air quality layer of the GIS file and run the code cell.

```

````{solution} notebook-collaboration
:class: dropdown

- Create a new notebook from the JupyterLab launcher (select Python kernel).
- Load your GIS document using the following Python code:

  ```python
  from jupytergis import GISDocument
  doc = GISDocument("your_project_name.jGIS")
  ```
- Your colleague can add and execute the following code to list all layers:
  ```python
  doc.layers
  ```
- Then they can find the air quality layer ID (the layer with the name Custom GeoJSON Layer) and remove it using:
  ```python
  air_quality_layer_id = "your_layer_id"
  doc.remove_layer(air_quality_layer_id)
  ```

---

Congratulations! You have completed the Collaboration Features of JupyerGIS tutorial. You now have the knowledge and tools to collaborate effectively with your team on GIS files and notebooks.

> 
> ## Additional resources
> 
> - [JupyterGIS Blog Post](https://blog.jupyter.org/real-time-collaboration-and-collaborative-editing-for-gis-workflows-with-jupyter-and-qgis-d25dbe2832a6)

Reviewer: I'm not sure how I feel about including this in "additional resources" as opposed to working it into prose. It feels like we should explain why we're linking this. What about...?

```suggestion

If you'd like to explore more of JupyterGIS' functionality, please view our
[JupyterGIS announcement blog post](https://blog.jupyter.org/real-time-collaboration-and-collaborative-editing-for-gis-workflows-with-jupyter-and-qgis-d25dbe2832a6)
for video demos of more features.
```

:shrug:
